Charlotte Mecklenburg Police Department – Traffic Stop Dataset

The Police Data Initiative was launched by then U.S. President Barack Obama for promoting the use of open data to encourage joint problem solving, innovation, enhanced understanding and accountability between communities and the law enforcement agencies that serve them. The police data sets are used, among other purposes, to track progress on performance goals, identify crime trends and hotspots, improve traffic safety, measure response times and call volume, reduce opioid deaths and show transparency around issues such as workforce demographics, officer complaints and use-of-force incidents.

Letting citizens see the raw data shows the true scope of what law enforcement officers deal with on a daily basis. As any officer knows, a single allegation of racial bias in a use-of-force incident can explode into a perception that the whole department is biased. Whereas, on the other hand, analysis of the data might show the opposite is true.  Open Data lets police agency tell an accurate, unmitigated and more complete story. The purpose is to help accelerate progress around data transparency and analysis, towards the goal of increased community trust and impact. With increased access to accurate information, police officers and community members alike are empowered to develop a fact-based perspective on community-police relations by understanding the actual public safety and crime problems within their jurisdictions and how the police are responding to those problems (Law Enforcement Executive’s Guide to Open Data, The Police Foundation 2017).

Through the Initiative, various local law enforcement agencies are establishing a community of practice that will allow for knowledge sharing, community-sourced problem solving and the establishment of documented best practices that can serve as examples for police departments nationwide. In addition to benefits of open data for citizens, journalists, social service agencies, advocacy organizations and nonprofits, open data can not only help a law enforcement agency build trust with the community by showing transparency, but also by helping them share their successes and gain support for the resources it needs.

As a part of this initiative, Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department (CMPD) has made available many datasets on its Open Source Data Page. We plan to analyze available datasets to potentially help CMPD tackle various problems such as:
 - Identify problem areas
 - Increase internal accountability
 - Decrease inappropriate uses of force
 - Find out if various factors (such as race, gender, etc.) play any role in officers' response to a particular incident
